---
title: Financial modeling of climate risk supports stringent mitigation action
date: 2022-12-20 08:01:35 +0300
subtitle: Climate economics
image: '/images/project-images/2-6-2023-pref-runs.png'
---

# Project goal 
We incorporate the findings from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's sixth assessment report into the _Climate Asset Pricing model -- AR6 (CAP6)_ financial asset pricing model that prices CO<sub>2</sub> emissions as an asset with negative returns. This framework includes an explicit representation of decision making under uncertainty and risk to be incorporated when considering 'optimal' abatement choices; put differently, in our model, policy can be made to 'hedge' against serious climate damages.

# Abstract
Valuing the cost of carbon dioxide (CO<sub>2</sub>) emissions is vital in weighing viable approaches to climate policy. Conventional approaches to pricing CO<sub>2</sub> evaluate trade-offs between sacrificing consumption now to abate CO<sub>2</sub> emissions versus growing the economy, therefore enlarging one’s financial resources to pay for climate damages later, all within a standard Ramsey growth framework. However, these approaches fail to comprehensively incorporate decision making under risk and uncertainty in their analysis, a limitation especially relevant considering the tail risks of climate impacts. Here, we take a financial-economic approach to carbon pricing by developing the Carbon Asset Pricing model -- AR6 (CAP6), which prices CO<sub>2</sub> emissions as an asset with negative returns and allows for an explicit representation of risk in its model structure. CAP6’s emissions projections, climate damage functions, climate emulator, and mitigation cost function are in line with the sixth assessment report (AR6) from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). The economic parameters (such as the discount rate) are calibrated to reflect recent empirical work.

We find that in our main specification, CAP6 provides support for a high carbon price in the near-term that declines over time, with a resulting 'optimal' expected warming below the 1.5 &deg;C target set forth in the Paris agreement. We find that, even if the cost of mitigating CO<sub>2</sub> emissions is much higher than what is estimated by the IPCC, CAP6 still provides support for a high carbon price, and the resulting 'optimal' warming stays below 2 &deg;C (albeit warming does exceed 1.5 &deg;C by 2100). Incorporating learning by doing further lowers expected warming while making 'optimal' policy more cost effective. By decomposing sources of climate damages, we find that risk associated with slowed economic growth has an outsized influence on climate risk assessment in comparison to static-in-time estimates of climate damages.

In a sensitivity analysis, we sample a range of discount rates and technological growth rates, and disentangle the role of each of these assumptions in determining central estimates of CAP6 output as well as its uncertainty over time. We find that central estimates of carbon prices are sensitive to assumptions around emissions projections, whereas estimates of warming, CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations, and economic damages are largely robust to such assumptions. We decompose the uncertainty in CO<sub>2</sub> prices, temperature rise, atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> levels, and economic damages over time, finding that individual preferences control price uncertainty in the near term, while rates of technological change drive price uncertainty in the distant future. The influence of individual preferences on temperature rise, CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations, and economic damages is realized for longer than in the case of CO<sub>2</sub> prices owing to the consequences of early inaction. Taken in totality, our work highlights the necessity of early and stringent action to mitigate CO<sub>2</sub> emissions in addressing the dangers posed by climate change.

# Working paper and citation
[Full working paper can be found here: "Financial modeling of climate risk supports stringent mitigation action"](../files/papers/Bauer-Proistosescu-Wagner-WP-230207-Financial-Modeling-Stringent-Targets.pdf), (7 February 2023).

_Citation_: A. M. Bauer, C. Proistosescu, and G. Wagner. Financial modeling of climate risk supports stringent mitigation action. _Columbia Business School working paper_. (7 February 2023).

# Collaborators
[Cristi Proistosescu](https://cdds-at-uiuc.github.io/team/cristi-proistosescu/) and [Gernot Wagner](https://gwagner.com).


# Presentations
American Geophysical Union Fall Meeting, December 2022; Columbia University Sustainable Development Seminar, Novermber 2022.

